---
title: 'Rain coming'
subtitle: 'Precipitation forecast for soggy Florida'
date: '2017-10-04'
hero:
    name: tropical-storm-16.jpg
    alt: 'A colorful radar map.'
    caption: 'Weather radar for the Eastern Atlantic Ocean.'
tags:
    - Alabama
    - 'Cabo Rojo National Wildlife Refuge'
    - Florida
    - 'Florida Keys'
    - Georgia
    - Hurricane
    - 'Hurricane Irma'
    - 'Hurricane Maria'
    - Louisiana
    - Mississippi
    - 'Puerto Rico'
    - 'U.S. Virgin Islands'
    - 'Vieques National Wildlife Refuge'
updated: 'October 4th, 2017'
---

A storm is brewing off the coast of Nicaragua that could drench the Florida Keys, a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service meteorologist said Wednesday.

At worst, the storm could develop into a “minimal hurricane” that could make landfall late this weekend around Louisiana, said meteorologist Kevin Scasny. He shared the forecast with other Service employees during a morning conference call focusing on cleanup efforts in the Caribbean following Hurricane Maria.

The tempest should be capable of generating anywhere from 2 to 5 inches or rain, Scasny said. Most of that is forecast to fall on the Keys, still recovering from Hurricane Irma.

The storm ought to reach the southeastern Gulf of Mexico by Saturday, Scasny said. Its arrival coincides with anticipated high tides generated by a full moon, he said.

In other developments, Service officials learned that more generators are bound for Puerto Rico, which largely remains without power. Ten generators have been packed on pallets and should be headed to the U.S. territory this weekend. 
They’ll be used to provide power to refrigerate food and medicine, as well as provide living conditions stable enough for employees to return to work.

The refuge at Vieques, just off the coast of mainland Puerto Rico, now has limited power. An electrician restored electricity to the visitors’ center, bunkhouse and maintenance shop. He is supposed to next head to Cabo Rojo National Wildlife Refuge.

[Stay up to date with the Service's response to hurricanes](https://www.fws.gov/hurricane).

## Contact

Mark Davis, Public Affairs Specialist  
[mark_r_davis@fws.gov](mailto:mark_r_davis@fws.gov), (404) 679-7291
