---
title: 'States receive more than $1 billion for recreation access, conservation'
subtitle: 'Excise tax revenues benefit fish, wildlife, outdoor recreation and local communities'
date: 2019-04-01T00:00:00.000Z
tags:
    - Boating
    - 'Dingell-Johnson Wallop-Breaux Federal Aid in Sport Fish Restoration Act'
    - Fishing
    - Hunting
    - 'Pittman-Robertson Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act'
    - Recreation
    - 'Wildlife and Sport Fish Restoration Program'
updated: 'April 3rd, 2019'
---

Outdoor recreationists who hunt, shoot, fish and boat are providing more than $1 billion this year to support increased outdoor access and wildlife habitat conservation across the United States.  The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is distributing the funds to all 50 states and U.S. territories today. The funds are generated through excise taxes on hunting, shooting and fishing equipment and boat fuel.

Authorized by Congress through the Pittman-Robertson Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act and Dingell-Johnson/Wallop-Breaux Federal Aid in Sport Fish Restoration Act, these dollars support critical state conservation and outdoor recreation projects. They are administered through the Service’s Wildlife and Sport Fish Restoration program, which is long considered the foundation of fish and wildlife conservation in the United States.

“For many decades funds generated by these programs have consistently supported millions of acres and miles of outdoor recreation access and wildlife habitat in this country,” said Margaret Everson, the Service’s Principal Deputy Director. “Thanks to industry, states and hunters, shooters, anglers and boaters, America’s wildlife and natural resources and the opportunities they provide will be available for generations to come.”

To date the Service has distributed more than $21 billion in apportionments for state conservation and recreation projects. The recipient state wildlife agencies have matched these funds with approximately $7.3 billion throughout the years, primarily through hunting and fishing license revenues.

Download [a state-by-state listing of the Service’s final apportionment for the Wildlife Restoration Program](https://wsfrprograms.fws.gov/Subpages/GrantPrograms/WR/WRFinalApportionment2019.pdf) and [the Sport Fish Restoration program funds for Fiscal Year 2019](https://wsfrprograms.fws.gov/Subpages/GrantPrograms/SFR/SFRFinalApportionment2019.pdf).

Learn more about the [WSFR program](https://wsfrprograms.fws.gov/).

## Contact

Laury Parramore, [Laury_Parramore@fws.gov](mailto:Laury_Parramore@fws.gov), (703) 358-2541